Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Channa Prakash. He is the Dean
of the College of Arts and Sciences at Tuskegee
University. His research expertise is on genetic improvement of
food crops that are of importance to developing countries
and training of scientists and students in plant biotechnology.
Dr Prakash has also been actively involved in announcing
the societal awareness of food biotechnology issues around the
world. And today we're talking about gene editing techniques
in plants, GMO s more generally organic agriculture and
some of the behavior of activists in regards to
environmentalism and agriculture, more specifically. So, Doctor Prakash, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much Ricardo. I'm honored to be
here.
So let's start with your work on gene editing
techniques in L. So tell us a little bit
about what you do there and perhaps for the
audience to start with, mm perhaps many people are
not familiar with what gene editing actually is. So
perhaps please start there and tell uh explain a
little bit what these techniques are really about.
Uh Thank you. So much. Um MANY of you,
your audience around the world, especially in Europe are
very familiar with uh GMO S or genetically modified
organisms. It's a very controversial topic. Uh Many genetically
modified crops are by and large are not allowed
to be grown by European farmers. Although Europe imports
a lot of genetically modified foods stuff, especially for
the livestock feed. But nevertheless, there is a new
uh and better, more precise technique that has come
about in the last few years and that is
called gene editing. The difference between GMO and gene
editing is very simple GMO. S involve introduction of
foreign genes into an organism. So when you take
say a gene from potato and put it into
tomato, that's a GMO. But gene editing is essentially
changing the few letters in the alphabet of the
DNA of within the organism without necessarily introducing foreign
genes that is genome editing or gene editing. Uh
It's a very revolutionary new technique called CRISPR cr
ISP R that was invented uh co invented by
a scientist from Europe and a scientist from the
United States. They both uh uh women who've got
the Nobel Prize uh three years ago for the
invention is radically transforming the whole area of genetic
alteration, especially in the biomedical area. And that involves
gene editing CRISPR uh the way to SSA a
good analogy to say that is like if you're
typing something on your phone and does the auto
correction and correct your spelling mistakes. And that's what
we do with gene editing to make correct some
of the spelling mistakes in the DNA and, and
by doing so, we could introduce subtle but significant
changes in the crop plants.
Mhm. But when it comes to the results we
can get, uh, are there big differences between using
more conventional, um, techniques that we use with genetically
modified organisms? And on the other hand, using gene,
because I know and we're going to get into
that in a bit that there's many myths and
misconceptions surrounding GMO S and that's probably where most
of the controversy stems from, right? But in this
particular case, since people, even though they might be
mistaken or misled, uh have these ideas surrounding GMO
S, do you think that perhaps they shouldn't be
as worried when it comes to gene editing techniques
or?
Right. You know, as far as science is concerned,
we there is we have been growing GMO S
for the past 30 years and we have not
had a single instance of harm to the human
health or the livestock health or even an environmental
mishap. We have not had that. But nevertheless, it
remains controversial primarily because the perception that we are
putting something foreign into your food and also because
of uh orchestrated opposition to this technology. And uh
so the consumer's mind uh especially in Europe has,
has really been uh very much opposed to the
concept of GMO S. But on the other hand,
gene editing is not much different from what we
have been doing uh in changing our crop plants
or even livestock for hundreds or even thousands of
years. You see every crop plant that you grow
today around the world, including everything that you grow
there in Europe. All those crops have been altered
over 10,000 years when we started uh experimenting with
agriculture. You see, we, we started growing um food
plants by exper by essentially growing wild crops. And
a lot of those wild crops were unfit for
agriculture and we started selecting those that could be
grown with less toxins and they don't shatter and
that are easier to cook and things like that.
And so over a period of time, all our
crop plants have been radically altered to suit the
way that could be conveniently grown, conveniently cooked and
they are nutritious. They are uh uh not uh
don't have toxins in the food things of that
nature. And the last 100 years, we have done
that in more scientific manner using uh hybridization, using
the principles of genetics. And one of the most
important tools that we have used is called muto
genesis. We have literally, we have taken the seeds
and expose them to radiation exo expose them to
chemicals to bring both changes of mutations. If there
is no particular trait in the crop. J plasm,
we introduce that artificially. And so people farmers and
scientists have been bringing about changes in your food,
crops and livestock for a long time. And this
gene editing represents one of the most newer techniques,
the one that is more precise, one that is
knowledge driven and for one for which we have
much greater understanding and we recognize it's far more
superior and safer than any of the other techniques
that we have used in making those changes. And
why do we need to be messing with our
food? Why do we need gene editing is an
important question and it is because we still need
to feed, you know, eight or 9 billion people.
And there's a lot of uh challenges to agriculture,
especially with the global climate change. And we need
all the tools in our toolbox and gene editing
represents one of the, the most important and powerful
tools that we have.
And so what would you say are the main
goals of using gene editing in plants specifically? Are
you trying to alter or improve certain specific traits?
And in what context, what circumstances? Exactly.
Yes. Uh GENE editing because it involves fine changes
of just few nucleotides in the DNA is best
suited for changing uh simple traits, traits like uh
making our plants more resistant to diseases, for instance,
like for ins uh just now a British scientist
uh have uh introduced uh tomatoes that are purple
in color, they almost look like blueberries. And uh
and this is now for the first time in
the United States here, uh we as home gardeners
can go buy those tomato seeds and grow those
tomato uh in our backyard. Why do we want
purple tomatoes? Those purple tomatoes? Apparently they introduced the
gene from the an edible snap dragon, the snap
dragon flowers that you may be familiar with, that
are very blue color flowers. And they've introduced that
into tomato because they have very high uh healthy
compounds called an anthocyanins that are uh apparently good
for our health. And so, gene editing uh is
very useful in making small changes in deleting characters,
such as if there are certain foods with high
uh undesirable elements. Like, you know, we have cyanide
in cassava, we have uh the uh um uh
uh anti nutritional factors in some of the grain
legumes that we eat. So we can remove those
uh undesirable elements from our food. But most importantly,
gene editing ha has proved very useful in in
empowering our crop plants to be more resilient to
certain environmental factors. We can make them more crops
more resistant to temperature, you know, increasing global climate
change. That is one uh we can, there are
examples of the scientists have uh improved the crops
more tolerant to flooding and tolerant to drought conditions,
tolerant to salt. And uh and there's really no
limit on what we can do with gene editing,
especially with simple traits, even complex traits such as
yield ha ha have has been increasing yield has
been achieved by m by editing several genes so
that tomatoes can be a larger size and the
rice, we could produce more rice uh per unit
area using less water. And, and so almost all
areas of farming can be altered and improved using
this technique.
And so when it comes to tackling the effects
of climate change specifically, is it that what we
are interested in here mostly is in developing temperature
resilient plants or are there other environmental issues like
for example, uh droughts and floods that we might
also help tackle here by developing certain specific traits
in plants?
Absolutely. Uh If you look around the literature and
what scientists have achieved, you know, I'm an editor
in chief of a very prominent journal in this
area called GM Crops and Food. And so I
tend to uh uh almost on a daily basis,
come across examples of where scientists are have developed
crops, plants that are res that are uh that
are more tolerant to environmental stresses such as salinity.
Because increasing salt is one of the problems of
sea level increase, uh encroaching of cultivated land with
the sea and increased use of flooding water and
rice and fertilizers have made a lot of our
plants, uh a lot of our soils alkaline, so
we can uh we can improved tolerance to salinity,
even acidity is a problem in some areas. And
of course, temperature flooding and drought are the most
important traits that uh crops have been altered, using
genetic. And another very interesting research that's going on
is as you can see, uh one of the
reasons why we have global climate change is because
of the increased carbon dioxide. And so scientists are
specifically developing trees and fast growing grasses that can
capture more carbon. So that's called carbon sequestration. So
they're able to, to literally trap carbon dioxide that
is in the atmosphere and reduce the carbon dioxide
uh uh surrounding the crop areas. And, and you
know, this is kind of a a newer more
frontier areas of research that we could do using
generating. And there's a company uh here in the
United States, I think with uh also which also
Israel based company, which is literally trying to develop
rice crops that can, that can be grown in
the sea. And so just imagine uh in two
thirds of our earth is covered by sea and
we cannot grow any food crops on that. Uh
But if you are able to, to grow rice
or any other crop on the ocean, and that
is going to be a, a really game changer
when it comes to feeding the world.
Yes. Uh And so, I mean, what would you
say are perhaps some of the biggest challenges in
developing these plants, these plants that are the result
of gene editing techniques.
Well, the challenges are two for one that is
technical. Uh WE need to have a great under
greater understanding of the genomics, the underlying genes. We
need to know what kind of genes control, what
kind of traits. And uh uh we have AAA
very uh explosion of knowledge going on. Uh AND
not only in the genetics of many of these
but what we call as uh proteomics out of
the, the genes and quote for proteins, what kind
of proteins? And then uh we have metabol loic,
what kind of metabolites that they, they secrete? And
so uh concomitant with increase in our knowledge or
explosion of genomics. There's also uh as you know,
a a tremendous knowledge increase applications in artificial intelligence,
uh computational power, all of that is helping and
our understanding of the basic biology of crop plants.
And that is important. While we have a good
understanding of crops that are grown in the West
such as like maize or soybean, uh we do
not necessarily have such an understanding of many of
the crops that are grown in the developing world
such as sweet potato or cassava or bananas. And
so that is one limitation crops that need to
be improved in the developing world in the tropical
areas, need more attention, need more funding. And uh
and that is one limitation that is being overcome
and it's just a matter of time. And secondly,
is the public acceptance and the global policies enabled
at where these generated crops can be tested and
can be commercially released. While countries such as the
United States and even country like India now have
a enabling policy where they say that hey, if
you have developed a crop by gene editing and
if it doesn't involve any foreign genes introduced as
a con as a consequence of that, then you
could more or less treat it like a conventionally
bred crops and don't have to go through a
huge regulatory approval process that what is involved for
the GM. And that way, many of these generated
crops, especially by the public sector, the universities which
don't necessarily have a huge budget to get regulatory
approvals can bring such crops um mainly again in
the in the emerging economies and the developing countries.
But Europe is still sitting on the fence today,
there is a very important decision that the European
Union uh is uh looking at and the members
of the parliament are going to be hoping to
see if just like all other countries including the
United States, Japan and Australia can European Union also
allow gene edited crops uh to be regulated as
conventionally bred crops and do not have to go
through the the GMO road. And so let's hope
Europe come to its census and vote favorably.
Mhm We'll come back to that certainly in a
bit. Uh But you mentioned earlier that the potential
of gene editing techniques applied to plants is virtually
limitless. So would that mean that for example, in
regards to what we talked about a few minutes
ago, since we have a very wide variety of
crops across the globe that it could potentially apply
to virtually all crops and be perhaps tailored in
each specific crop to each specific environmental context. So
let's say with climate change, if temperatures go up
in a particular place, perhaps in that particular place
for that particular crop, we could have the genes
in a way to make the plant more temperature
resilient or if there's more floods in a particular
place or droughts, we could also uh perhaps tweak
with some genes to make the specific plants more
resilient to those kinds of events is that it
Yeah, absolutely. Uh There is no limit on what
uh crops uh can be altered, what crop traits
can be altered. We are only limited by our
knowledge and the knowledge is improving and uh e
extending. And uh there are, you know, uh there
are still, there are going to be certain limitations
for instance. So far, I have not seen very
good examples of gene editing trying to improve the
pest resistance of crops. Uh BECAUSE gene editing can
only bring about changes and what DNA it has
and what traits that are there and what trait
that are either suppressed or uh when that could
be unleashed that are hidden. But on the other
hand, uh uh currently, much of our crops that
are pest resistant is because of a, a technology
called BT, it comes from AAA bacterial gene called
from bacteria called das thy. And that's what protects
our cotton against uh uh cotton shoot borer and
things of that nature. And uh Kakon, many of
those props have BT genes there. But at this
moment, gene editing, uh except in few instances, not
been very useful for pics. But nevertheless, other than
that, uh uh especially for quality traits, gene editing
has proved uh really, really useful. And over time,
I am sure for practically any trait in any
crop. Uh As long as there is DNA, we
can study them, we can change them.
So let me ask you a general question about
gmos and I want to address this question because
it is extremely common and there's many, many misconceptions
surrounding it. So you mentioned earlier, for example, when
it comes to potential health is issues that we
have now 30 plus years of assessing the potential
effects that GMO S could have on human health
particularly. And I mean, I've seen even open letters
written by or signed by hundreds of uh scientists,
sometimes even Nobel Prize winners saying that there's no
evidence at all that should make people worry about
potential health risks here. But apart from that, would
you say that there are any legitimate worries at
all about the development of GMO S?
No, not really because uh you know, it, I
it doesn't mean that some problem would not arise
in the future, but it is not unique to
GMO S. You see, uh we have had some
problems even with conventional plant breeding. For instance, a
celery variety was developed in California a few years
ago when workers were uh who were in the
working with those, but only that particular variety started
developing the rashes and they found out that, that
salary because they had made it more pest resistant.
And so they had increased the particular chemical naturally
producing chemical and this was by conventional breeding. And
so we had to take the salary variety away
from cultivation. And so things like that can happen
even while developing GMO S. Uh FOR instance, there
was a, a study that 20 years ago, a
company had uh borrowed genes from Brazil nut and
put it into soybeans trying to make it more
uh uh with high protein and better protein quality.
Uh CERTAIN types of uh amino acids are not
found in soybeans, sulfur containing amino acids that are
important for livestock feeding. And so they got sulfur
containing amino acid type of protein genes from Brazil.
I can put it into protein. And then uh
in that protein uh in soybeans, they found that
it did increase the allergenicity of those soybeans because,
you know, some people are allergic to Brazil nut.
So if you have a peanut allergy or ground
nut allergy, and if I take a, a gene
from groundnut and put it into rice or tomato,
you may increase that allergy. So what I'm trying
to say here is it's not that we are
not going to have any problems with GMO. Sw.
What we have is we have sufficient chucks and
balances the, the kind of testing that we have.
And because it is so knowledge driven, we could
a priori even before uh conducting many of these
experiments, we can expect potential problems with certain types
of GMO and we can avoid it. But on
the other hand, look at the tremendous benefits and
the possibilities. Right now, we have research going on
trying to develop hypoallergenic uh ground nuts or peanuts,
hypoallergenic, soybean and uh and bananas that can produce
uh vitamin A and golden rice, which can uh
of course help with the vitamin A. And so
when you look at all the potential positive health
benefits of uh GMO S and gene editing some
of the, the, the hypothetical problems that can happen
are very minuscule and they could be uh predicted
and can be avoided and they are not unique
because you can have the same allergy problem. Uh
If you just cross uh a wild tomato with
a, a cultivated tomato by traditional breeding, you could
bring many of the allergens and toxins from the
wild species into the cultivated. So uh even environmental
problems uh you can introduce even by conceal breeding.
And isn't it also the case that when people
argue for example that by using gene modification techniques
or even perhaps some of them would argue the
same for gene editing specifically that we are sort
of messing with nature because we are introducing certain
types of genes where they wouldn't be naturally found,
isn't it the case that we have actually been
doing that? But not with this level of knowledge
and precision since we started agriculture uh 10,000 years
ago, 14,000 years ago, with both plants and animals
through artificial selection. But without any control at all,
when it comes to the genetic material and also
with techniques like hybridization.
Yeah, absolutely. Uh You see, we have been doing
it for a long time and so it's not
something uh new that we are messing with the
nature. We started messing with the nature. Uh WHEN
we walked out of the caves and started planting
seeds and when we found out some of those
seeds were uh not very good. We started, you
know, looking for a better uh crops within that.
And that's how the whole selection process slowly occurred.
And so there is uh it is a responsible
way of trying to manipulate what is around us
in a way that could help feed the humanity,
but doing so in a manner that is sustainable
because we do recognize that agriculture, uh you know,
feeding 8 billion people on this planet entails some
environmental damage, correct. We have cleared massive amounts of
forest lands to grow these crops, uh, you know,
the thousands of years ago or even still doing
it in many parts of the world and that
is undesirable. And secondly, we use a lot of
chemicals, fertilizers and pesticides and we use a lot
of heavy equipment that causes damage to the soil.
And so what the question is not what we
are messing with the nature. Not. Ok. Ok. That's,
that's, I think that's irrelevant because we are already,
you know, we, we, we, we, we are doing
that in a very big way and for many
thousands of years. But moving forward, uh the question
is how can we uh continue to, to feed
the humanity but in a manner that is less
damaging to the environment, less damaging to soil, less
damaging to the air and less damaging to water
and to make sure that uh uh uh ability
to grow food today is does not compromise uh
the ability for our future generations to be growing
food. And so I uh for when you answer
that question, the sustainability uh can be achieved through
knowledge through science, you know, not through ideology. You
know, people say organic farming, a lot of that
is just uh not, you know, the scientifically uh
I I it does not show that when you
just have organic crops that are sustainable, but I
do believe using um technology such as gene editing
combined with all other uh principles of sustainability would
help us to move forward uh to continue to
feed the humanity in a responsible manner and in
a sustainable manner.
So where do you think these misconceptions that people
have surrounding GMO S stem from? And particularly why
is it that people here where I live in
the European Union seem to be particularly worried about
it? Do you think that there's perhaps that it
stems perhaps mostly from the fact that some people
have been putting out some misconceptions out there on
the internet and elsewhere and then people get across
them and because they are ignorant of the science
surrounding GMO S, they just believe them because they
sound credible to some extent. Or are there perhaps
other aspects here to consider as well?
Uh I, I think there, there are multiple reasons.
Uh YOU know, the, the, the internet has certainly
played a role but I think as human beings,
we, we have, and, you know, I, we have
evolved naturally to be very suspicious of anything that
is different about our food, which that's how it
has protected us even during our kill in days.
Uh When we saw something, uh if we saw
an almond, uh that, uh uh you know, which
we have never eaten before. And we, we were,
uh we, those who are careful in what they
put into their mouth survived and proc created. You
see, so we have that hard wired into our
uh evolutionary system to be suspicious of food. And
uh and you can see a lot of examples
uh uh like when we started uh uh pasteurizing
milk, for instance, it was not really accepted. It
was, there were a lot of demonstration, there was
a lot of opposition because that was messing with
my, you know, what can be more sacred than
milk. And uh it took almost 100 years uh
after Louis Pasture invented pasteurization before it was accepted.
And uh a lot of other technologies, the canning
of food, freezing of food, uh processing of food
there have been in, there have been oppositions and
people don't readily accept. And even, you know, when
I go to a new country and when I
see something uh different food, II, I don't, you
know, I'm always uh very cautious about it. You
see what I mean? So I think that is
humanity. But on the other hand, we humans have
uh experimented with new food, Euro Europe. Um You
know, for Italy tomato is so sacred. Now, what
is uh uh less Italian than tomatoes? But you
know, Italians never ate tomato until 16th century. Irish.
The potato is, is integral to Ireland. But, but
there was no potato in Ireland until again, 16th
century, you see coffee was introduced into England and
tea was introduced. They're all new crops. And over
time, we have uh we have uh learned to
accept them if you like it. And if you
find it useful for us. And so GMO s
are again when they came along, uh it was
a radical idea for people to think that something
foreign genes are being put. But now we more
and more knowledge, we recognize that such things happen
in nature. For instance, they did a study of
sweet potatoes. They, in, in, in Peru, there's an
international potato center where they have thousands and thousands
of varieties of sweet potato. And they found that
all the sweet potatoes that they had in the
collection had a, a bacteria, bacterial gene in them
that was introduced uh directly like very similar to
the same bacteria we use to make GMO S.
And so mother nature has been making GMO S
all the time and uh it's just that it
happens naturally and we didn't know much about it.
I didn't, we, we didn't worry about it, but
when we have uh scientists doing it, we tend
to worry about it, but that's one factor. But
secondly, true. Uh THERE was an orchestrated opposition to
GMO S in, in many countries, especially the rich
countries by a, by a very uh well funded
organizations such as Greenpeace saw this as a very
lucrative activities to protest against uh GMO S because
it represented taking on big corporations like Monsanto at
the time. And there was a lot of anti-americanism
involved in that in Europe. Uh And so going
after big companies like Monsanto uh was favored and
tabloids did a lot of havoc in the early
two thousands with a lot of fake stories about
GMO S causing impotence, you know, causes hair loss
and things like that. And uh and secondly, uh
European farmers also were afraid of GMO S because
as you know, Europe farmers, like many farmers are
very heavily subsidized. And uh and they felt that
if you bring in a tool that improve the
productivity, the governments might take the subsidy away from
them. Even today, German French Belgian farmers are protesting
for a different reason, variety of reasons. And so
all of that mixed together, uh I think in
Europe uh was suspicious and the green parties held
uh the balance to power in countries like Germany
also had a platform of anti GMO and uh
and all of that contributed to the mess that's
Europe today.
Do you think that perhaps some of that when
it comes to the European Union also has to
do with some sort of economic protectionism? Because if
it, if they make it harder for plants that
are GMO s basically to come into the eu
and be sold here, then they are basically protecting
at least to a certain extent European farmers
a absolutely, you know, follow the money because for
a any time when there is a, you know,
when there is an apprehension when there is a,
a protectionism, it's because you're trying to protect something
and then Europe, um you know, uh uh uh
did that mainly in the beginning. Uh MANY of
the countries did that to keep some of the,
the American uh uh products away. But on the
other hand, you know, Europe, when it suits their
interest, didn't have any problem because Europe, uh cheese
is so integral to European culture, right? I mean,
what, what is uh uh France without your cheese
or German, without your cheese? And uh almost uh
80% 90% of all the cheese that's produced in
Europe uses the common in DNA genetically engineered enzymes
and they are not labeled, people have no problem
with them. Uh But there is biotechnology underlying all
of your cheese today. And almost every uh vial
of insulin that is sold in Europe today is
genetically engineered. And so there's no controversy about that.
They are not labeled GMO S and nobody is
protesting on the streets against that. And so the
only reason they are protesting against GM crops uh
is because of uh some of these political factors
even there, Europe is the largest consumer of GM
product in the world because Europe is uh next
to China imports more soybean genetically modified soybean to
feed your livestock than any other uh continent. And
so there is a certain level of hypocrisy going
on here.
So, in a related topic, I would like to
ask you now a little bit about organic agriculture.
That is something that people in the EU and
regulators specifically seem to be very fond of. So,
um this is, of course, is a topic that
is not only related to agriculture, food production, but
also to environmentalism. At least some of the goals
here would be environmental goals. So what do you
make of the promises of people who support organic
agriculture?
Conceptually, it looks like a good idea. Uh ORGANIC
agriculture, you know, why not? Why do we have
to uh you know, put poisonous chemicals into our
food? Right? I mean, if it's gonna cause so
much health problem, if it's destroying our environment, why
are we doing it? Why are farmers putting all
of those chemicals? Right. So on the face of
it, when you really, when you're not well informed,
that's the kind of argument. But the the point
uh the most important factor remember here is the
organic agriculture is a very small niche, ideologically driven
uh uh segment within agriculture. It's probably about 2%
3% at the most 5% of the food in
maybe in countries as uh you know, Germany or
France. It may be a little bit higher. But
overall organic is a an elite uh segment of
the food because it costs more. So you are
you, so it is not a solution to all
the the put security issues in the world because
you won't be able to feed the poor with
organic. And secondly, organic costs more because it is
less productive. If you don't put uh uh uh
if you don't amend the soil fertility uh of
what nutrients you are taking away from that. And
trying to put that only with using manure and
not using the def fertilizer, you won't be able
to produce a lot of crop. OK. And so
as a consequence of that, it takes a lot
more land to grow the same amount of food.
All right. So where are you going to get
that land? You're gonna be cutting down the forest,
correct? So which is far more destructive, cutting more
forest or adding a little bit of uh nitrogen
into the soil to produce the same amount of
food. And so organic, you know, on the just
if you're, if you're not aware of all the
details related to environment and sustainability sounds like a
good idea. But as a food policy issue, organic
is a very terrible idea because organic foods cost
more organic foods, take away a lot more land
to grow and, and finally, they are not any
way more healthier. Uh BECAUSE uh again and again,
the evidence show that uh if you if you
use this very controlled amounts of pesticides and monitor
the levels of pesticide rescues in your food like
we do here in the US, there is uh
it's not as much a problem as it's made
out to be. And if we use uh uh
U fertilizers in a very responsible manner and with
now increasing technology with precision agriculture, we use less
and less of those. And finally, with a lot
of new technology including conservation tillage, uh increasing the
use of herbicide tolerant crops through GMO S or
gene editing. We now don't have to till the
land, tilling the land uh to using plows is
one of the most destructive acts uh in agriculture.
And uh the, the when you think of uh
uh the uh in the dust bowl during the
depression time in the United States, it's because of
the flowing of the land where all the soil
was blown through the air and water. You see,
and when you see the muddied rivers of Mississippi,
it's because of the tilling of the land in
Iowa and Illinois upstream is the the very precious
organic matter in the soil. So we have now
almost eliminated tilling of the land using biotechnology. And
so in, in, in reality, using science and innovation,
we can bring more goodness to the environment than
what ideologically driven organic pest in. In fact, organic
agriculture uses a lot of pesticides. Many people don't
know that they use pesticides like sulfur, which is
not even organic and it's a lot more toxic
and so organic is simply a a you know,
a a segment of agriculture that people with a
lot of money can afford, but it is not
something that is going to help feed the world.
Mhm Actually that, that last point you made there
was one thing that I was going to ask
you about because actually it's very misleading. The fact
that many times people who produce food through organic
agriculture and promote it as such, label it as
chemical free. I mean, of course, just on the
face of it, it makes no sense because everything
is composed of chemicals. But even if we ignore
that bit, it's not at, at all the case
that they do not resort to any pesticides at
all. And sometimes even pesticides that are more damaging
to the environment and to human health potentially, uh
just because they are labeled as natural by the
food uh system. Right.
Certainly. And you, you, you said it right because
uh it's really deceptive marketing practices trying to claim
everything is natural. And you know, there, there have
been studies that have been done. There's a very
extraordinary scientist called Bruce Ames at UC Berkeley was
one of the most sighted scientists for 30 years.
And he has done some studies to show that
when we consume a cup of coffee, the natural
chemicals that are there in the coffee are a
lot more toxic than trace elements of pesticides that
can, that are used to grow coffee. And so
by worrying about that, we are really uh trying
to, to, to deny the advance of technology and
innovation that could help produce more food and, and
it can be dangerous too. For instance, recently in
Sri Lanka, a couple of years ago, the the
president of Sri Lanka based on misinformation and mis
avise from some of the environmentalists including one really
worshiper as Lady from India, uh banned uh pesticides,
banned fertilizers. And uh Sri Lanka is a agriculturally
very rich country. You know, Sri Lanka grows some
of the best quality tea that you consume uh
in the Europe and Sri Lanka is agriculturally fairly
self sufficient country. They grow enough rice to feed
themselves and even export. And it's a middle income
country uh have much higher uh per capita income
than its northern neighbor India for instance. But by,
by simple, the single act of banning uh importing
fertilizers and banning the use of pesticides with a
degree. Sri Lanka literally precipitated an economic catastrophe to
the country. And uh uh even two years since
they have not fully recovered from the, the huge
reckless damage that was done. And uh uh it
also reminds me of another uh uh uh uh
very pseudo scientists expert in uh during ST times
in the US, Sr and the Soviet Union, a
guy called Lysenko uh advised the Stalin that the
genetics at the time we didn't have GMO S
but they were worried about hybrids and genetics. The
conventional breeding said that they are somehow antithetical to
the communism and they are against communist principles. And
so they banned uh uh breeding of crops and
they banned scientific agriculture. And as a consequence of
that, the the the Russian uh food production came
down and China later embraced this, Mao embraced that.
Uh AND during the Cultural Revolution and we didn't
know much about that, but a lot of information
came out later that literally millions and millions of
people died as a consequence of the pseudoscience. And
so, you know, organic agriculture or opposition to GMO
S might look cute uh for some, but it
has some very serious consequences from when you look
from a policy level, embracing pseudoscience as consequences. And
that one politicians need to be very careful about
that, especially in Europe because, you know, there is
a lot more uh tendency to have these romantic
notions about these things uh in Europe more than
other places. And uh you need to be very
careful about that
when it comes to Li Zenko, if I remember
correctly and if not, please correct me here. Um
I think that he was sort of an extreme
environmentalist and didn't really care much or if or
at all about genetics. And so that was the
main issue here, right? I I mean, it was
trying to cultivate crops. We uh uh while at
the same time ignoring entirely the genetic side of
things
there. Correct. Yes. Yeah, he, he, his philosophy was
we can re shape the crops uh improve the
crops by e environment, but you know, like slowly
uh growing uh some crops uh acclimatizing them. So
let's say you want to make them more tolerant
to heat or tolerant to cold, we can gradually
expose them to cold or heat and we can
make any crop adaptable to these conditions. And you
know, there, there may be a certain uh uh
truth to that with some epigenetics and things like
that. But nevertheless, what he did was he used
that very pseudo scientific basis of that vernal organization
and things of that nature. They called it science
to literally ban uh uh genetics, ban conventional hybridization.
And so much so that there was a great
extraordinary scientist called VLO uh in, in, in Soviet
Union at the time, he is literally the father
of biodiversity. He is the one who helped identify
that all our crop plants have a origin in
some places and they came. And then if you
go back to the centers of origin, you can
find uh even today a great diversity of wild
species like potato, you can find it in Peru,
right? And if you want to find relatives of
coffee, you go to Ethiopia. If you want to
find relatives of rice, you go to Asia, I
think like that. He was the one who first
identified that all crop plants have their origin and
they go to their origin. And he collected all
those wild and he looms literally hundreds of thousands
of that and made the concept of gene bank,
which is fundamental to all agricultural development and what
Lysenko and Stalin did was to literally put Bala
on all scientists who were working on breeding into
jail and, and the father of biodiversity and father
of agricultural innovation of 20th century, died of starvation
in Gulag in Russia. And so this is, this
is one of the sad uh uh uh stories
that we have learned from our history. And you
know what they say about the history. If we
ignore history, what happens and uh we the ugly
head of that uh opposition to science keeps coming
again and again and again in different forms. And
one needs to be very careful about it. Doctor
Norwin blog, the the father of Green Revolution. And
uh used to one many times again as to
some of these pseudo they are not environmentalists. You
know, we are all in the, we are the
environmentalist because we know what is the, what is
the environment we live with that? And uh these
are pseudo environmental, they are using environment as a,
as a an excuse or a regard to uh
to advance their specific ideological causes or even to,
to, to for fundraising and, and their own prosperity.
Mhm So we'll come back to that point about
environmentalists in a second. But let me just ask
you a little bit more about Sri Lanka, which
you mentioned a few minutes ago because this is
actually something that was brought to my attention by
a supporter, a patron of the show, Bernard. So
and if I understand it correctly in Sri Lanka,
then, uh, they already have an economic crisis but
then it got worsened by the government basically banning
pesticides and adopting an agricultural system solely based on,
uh, organic agriculture.
Right. Exactly. Yeah. And now Sri Lanka, because of
the, the COVID and, uh, they are very high
reliance on tourism was already in bad shape at
that time. But so are many countries, you know,
there are so many countries that are rely, rely
on uh tourism as the main economic source of
income, dozens and dozens of countries in the world
and they didn't go bankrupt and they were able
to sustain. And Sri Lanka is economically had very
sound uh economic underpinnings. And uh because it is
also an agricultural country and by, by taking this
very reckless decision to go organic overnight, uh you
know, and if they wanted to embrace principles of
organics, reduce uh environmental degradation to over use of
chemicals is an admirable goal. And be because we
understand that places like India, there has been some
problems in use of agrichemicals. And so that is
a legitimate issue that needs to be addressed. But
by, by taking a reckless decision and going organic
overnight, I think he precipitated the economic downfall of
Sri Lanka. And uh and so there is, it
did, there were street protests and uh the president
had to, to resign. And uh two months into
that, Sri Lanka is still not fully recovered uh
from the problem. So that shows that one needs
to be very careful uh about taking important policy
decisions that are not uh based on science that
are not based on reason. But if you just
listen to some of the pseudo uh activists and
pseudo environmentalists, you bring a, a huge damage to
your country.
So let's get into the last topic of our
conversation today. Then that is something you've already touched
a little bit on. But what, what are your
general thoughts on environmentalism as a movement and on
people who, who sometimes are genuine e environmental activists,
but other times perhaps label themselves as such, but
are maybe ignorant or delusional or misled in some
particular ways,
right? I think environmentalism in a very broad sense
is an important uh movement that is uh that
has brought a lot of good, uh especially when
you look at global climate change, uh which has
been a, which is an important factor. It is
really transformed. You know, it is a, it's an
existential threat uh to the uh the, the world
civilization today. And uh I believe in understanding and
awareness of that and it's a very scientific issue.
We need to be aware of what causes this
and how we can do it and what are
some of the uh solutions for that. And so
it's a very science based uh uh approach that
we, we need to have to, to solve that.
But on the other hand, what has happened here
is this the so-called the environmentalists who are causing
damage are those that simply bring pseudoscience and ideology
into the mix here? And so this is where
it's a problem for us, especially for a common
person to separate the wheat from the chaff uh
to recognize what are some of the most pressing
issues. Uh The wicked problems that are threatening the,
the future of humanity today here. Then uh then
see how, what solutions that we we can move
forward. What is unfortunately happened here is uh uh
uh individuals who are really who are in the
fore front uh in the in the minds of
the public who were seen as very poor environment,
are doing a lot more damage to the progress
of the society. And people like Wan Na Shiva
in India is the one who advised Sri Lankan
government along with some of the other scientists like
Hans Heron uh who was a World World Food
Prize winner uh did uh did do, did far
more great damage. You know, Lysenko was a scientist,
he was a geneticist, but he simply misled the
country. Uh There was a a AAA very famous,
there is a very famous scientist here in the
US called Duisburg in UC Berkeley, one of the
most prestigious universities in the uh in the world.
And he uh was of the opinion, he's a
member of National Academy of sciences too, which is
the highest honor a scientist and can get here
in the US of the opinion that HIV uh
uh virus does not cause A I DS. And
uh and uh in South African government believed him.
And as a consequence of that, they banned all
the therapeutic uh proteinase inhibitors and things of that
age cocktail that has really kept A I DS
in check all around the world in the last
30 years, the banned and as a consequence of
embracing the pseudoscience and pseudo uh uh Star Wars
like this, they saw about 203 100,000 and people
died in Sri Lanka. I'm sorry, in South Africa,
because of uh the A I DS uh drugs
were not allowed into the country. And so one
must be very wary of uh individuals that have
a, a vested interest in advancing certain causes. But
on the other hand, uh we do have to,
to, to, to understand that the uh scientific voice
such as I CCC, for instance, coming up for
the, the um for the global climate change and
also to listen to the established scient scientists and
the scientific community to see what kind of solutions
that we can embrace in a way that we
could bring about addressing this. Uh uh SO solutions
bring about the solutions to the addressing the problems
in a manner that is uh not ideologically driven,
but fairly science driven.
Mhm. Right. A and this is very unfortunate and,
and this will be my last question also because
I guess that many times what some environmentalists put
out as information is in fact, misinformation, it is
very misleading and unfortunately, the general public and this
is something that we can't really blame the common
people for because they are not uh informed about
such matters. Uh It sounds good, it sounds intuitive
but is it is misleading and it not only
applies to agriculture to, for example, misconceptions surrounding organic
agriculture, GMO S but also even more broadly to
some of the solutions, the best solutions that we
would have on the table to fight back against
climate change. Right.
Exactly, climate change and even health issue when there
was a global pandemic, there was quite a lot
of opposition to the vaccines and it was at
the end of the day, it was the vaccine
and then a and a very new innovation and
tested innovation MRN a vaccine that help really bring
about an end to that. And, and so I
believe we must be open minded about many of
the possibilities of innovation, including how we address climate
change. And uh we if we are uh if
we invoke uh uh uh precautionary principle uh that
until we know for sure, this particular solution is
very, very safe that we cannot use it, then
there is, we cannot move forward because humanity has
moved forward the last 7000 years. By embracing change,
but by embracing change in a very informed manner.
And now with our knowledge in the, in the
last 100 years, even last 30 years, as we
have an explosion of knowledge, because the science has
advanced so much, whether it's in the areas of
health, whether it's in the area of uh agriculture,
uh climate change. And so let's use our knowledge
in a sensible manner to bring about a change
without necessarily how to bringing about any problems as
a consequence of that.
So, Doctor Prakash, uh just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Yeah, certainly. Yeah. If you are on Twitter, uh
if you look for Ag Bow World, that is
my handle, you know, I used to run a
website called AG Biow World. AG is in agriculture,
bio biotechnology or biology and world. Uh If you,
if you look for AG by a world on
either on Facebook or Twitter, you'll find me every
day talking about these issues, uh posting funny memes
on this issue and trying the hope that uh
we could help educate and also learning. Uh I'm
learning every day uh from smart people like you
Ricardo.
Well, thank you so much for the kind words,
Doctor Prakash and thank you for your time and
it's been a real pleasure to talk to you.
I've been a big fan. So thank you so
much.
Thank you, Hanna is mine and a pleasure.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mar Nevs called in Hofi, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz J
and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes Mark
Smith J. Tom Hummel S Friends, David. Wilson Yasa,
dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli
Nico Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stass, Nale Me, Gary
G Alman Sam of Zaypj Barboza, Julian Price Edward
Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Lati Gilon Cortez
Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter
Wo David Williams Di A Costa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Chao Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fist,
Larry Dey junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then
Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul
Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson. Chris
Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perlis Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jan Ner Urla. Good enough,
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers
is our web, Jim Frank Luca stuffin, Tom Veg
and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you
for all.